---
permalink: /neon/getting-started/understand-the-ecosystem
description: Overview article on the Neon ecosystem introducing available software components.
---

# Understand the Ecosystem
The Neon ecosystem contains a range of tools that support you during data collection and data analysis. This overview introduces all the key components so you can become familiar with all tools at your disposal.

## Neon App
You should have already used the Neon app to [make your first recording](/neon/getting-started/first-recording.html). This app is the core of every Neon data collection.

When your Neon is connected to the Companion device, it supplies it with power and the app calculates a real-time gaze signal. When making a recording, all generated data is saved on the Companion device.

The app automatically saves [UTC timestamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coordinated_Universal_Time) for every generated data sample. This allows you to easily sync your data with other 3rd party sensors, or to sync recordings from multiple subjects that have been made in parallel.


## Pupil Cloud
Pupil Cloud is our web-based storage and analysis platform located at [cloud.pupil-labs.com](https://cloud.pupil-labs.com/). It is the recommended tool for handling your Neon recordings.
It makes it easy to store all your data securely in one place and it offers a variety of options for analysis.

[TODO: update image]

<div class="pb-4" style="display:flex;justify-content:center;">
  <v-img
    :src="require('../../media/invisible/getting-started/PL-Ecosystem-white.jpg')"
    max-width=100%
  >
  </v-img>
</div>

Once a recording is uploaded to Pupil Cloud the processing pipeline begins adding several additional low-level data streams to it - including the 200 Hz gaze signal and fixation data. Some of this data (e.g. the 200 Hz gaze signal) is not available outside of Pupil Cloud.

From here, you can either download the raw data in a convenient format or use some of the available analysis algorithms to extract additional information from the data. For example, use the [Face Mapper](/neon/enrichments/#face-mapper) to automatically track when subjects are looking at faces. Or use the [Reference Image Mapper](/neon/enrichments/#reference-image-mapper) to track when subjects are looking at objects of interest represented by a reference image.

We have a strict [privacy policy](https://pupil-labs.com/legal/) that ensures your recording data is accessible only by you and those you explicitly grant access to. Pupil Labs will never access your recording data unless you explicitly instruct us to.

If Cloud upload is enabled in the Neon app, then recordings will be uploaded automatically to Pupil Cloud. No additional effort is required for data logistics.


## Pupil Capture

To take advantage of the high robustness and ease of use of the Neon eye tracking pipeline, we recommend using the Neon app and Pupil Cloud for data collection and analysis. You can however also use Neon in conjunction with the Pupil Capture software, which was originally developed for the Pupil Core eye tracking headset.

When using Pupil Capture, the Pupil Core eye tracking pipeline will be used instead. You would essentially be using Neon as if it was a Pupil Core headset. This comes with all the strengths and limitations of Pupil Core, i.e. good performance in controlled lab conditions, but limited robustness in real-world scenarios and the need for calibration.

::: tip
Note: Recordings made with the Neon app can not be opened in Pupil Player. Recordings made with Pupil Capture can not be uploaded to Pupil Cloud.
:::


<DownloadLinks/>


## Neon Monitor

[TODO: update image]

<div style="display:flex;justify-content:center;" class="pb-4">
  <v-img
    :src="require('../../media/invisible/getting-started/pi-monitor-app.jpg')"
    max-width=100%
  >
  </v-img>
</div>

All data generated by Neon can be monitored in real-time using the Neon Monitor app. To access the app simply visit [neon.local:8080](http://neon.local:8080) in your browser while being connected to the same WiFi network as the Companion device.

The real-time streaming app enables you to monitor and control a recording session remotely without having to directly interact with the Companion device carried by the subject. You can view the scene video and gaze data remotely in your browser. You can also start and stop recordings and annotate important moments in time with [events](/neon/basic-concepts/events). All data will be saved with the recording on the Companion device.

## Real-Time API
All data generated by Neon is accessible to developers in real-time via our **Real-Time API**. Similar to the Neon Monitor app, it allows you to stream data, remotely start/stop recordings and save events. The only requirement is that the Companion device and the computer using the API are connected to the same WiFi network.

This enables you to e.g. implement Human Computer Interaction (HCI) applications with Neon or to streamline your experiments by remotely controlling your devices and saving events automatically.

Check-out out our [real-time API tutorial](/neon/real-time-api/introduction/) to learn more!

For a concrete usage example, see [Track your Experiment Progress using Events](/neon/real-time-api/track-your-experiment-progress-using-events/)!

## Neon Frames

Neon can be used in a large range of environments for a variety of applications. We offer a range of different frames designed for different use cases to further facilitate this. Next to the [Just act natural](TODO: insert link) frame, which closely resembles a regular pair of glasses, there is for example the [Better safe than sorry](TODO: insert link) frame, which has a safety rating, or the [Ready set go!](TODO: insert link) frame, which can easily be worn under various helmets. For work with children there is the child-size frame [All fun and games](TODO: insert link). A full list of all available frames can be found in the[shop](TODO: insert link to frames in shop).

If none of the available frames fits your needs, you can also design your own using the [Bare Metal](TODO: insert link to custom frame) version. You could design your own glasses-like frame or integrate Neon into your a custom head-worn device.

[TODO: insert fitting image introducing the different frames]
